10Neurophenomenology
Mapping Structures of the Mind
Frank M. Diaz
Introduction
Researchers gather both subjective and objective information in neurophenome-
nology to study and understand the mind (Varela, 1996). For instance, a researcher 
interested in how the brain processes pitch and rhythm might design a study in 
which neuroimaging data is collected during an experimental music listening task. 
Typically, these types of experiments focus on gathering what is known as third- 
person or “objective” data, which may include measurements such as electroenceph-
alogram (EEG) or functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). However, for 
the neurophenomenologist, the study of subjectivity or first-person experience is a 
necessary aspect of understanding the mind. Therefore, in addition to third-person 
measurements, the researcher might also ask participants to report on their mental 
state before, during, or after listening to the excerpts, and then use this information 
to determine if and how it might relate to variations in the neuroimaging data.
Typically, neurophenomenologists look for patterns in experience that are consist-
ent within and between participants. In the proposed example, the researcher might 
discover that some participants feel consistently distracted before listening to the 
excerpts, while others feel focused and prepared. Based on these observations, the 
researcher may decide to determine how neural measures vary based on the excerpts 
and how groupings of “prepared” and “distracted” participants might affect these 
outcomes. For the neurophenomenologist, data generated from first-person accounts 
inform how and what we study from a third-person perspective. Additionally, in order 
to provide a nuanced and fuller account of the mind, neurophenomenologists suggest 
that third-person observations must bear some meaningful relationship to first-person 
experience. This process of mutual constraint, aimed at bridging information gained 
from qualitative and quantitative approaches to studying the mind, is one of the defin-
ing characteristics of neurophenomenology.
First-Person Methods
Similar to qualitative methodologies such as grounded theory and case studies, neu-
rophenomenology is concerned with understanding first-person accounts of lived 
experience. Neurophenomenologists, however, put a greater emphasis on the struc-
tures rather than the objects of experience, under the assumption that structural 
processes are good candidates for identifying bridges between first- and third-person 
observations of the mind (Lutz & Thompson, 2003). This means, for instance, that a 
person’s sense of intention, emotional state, and other similar first-person dynamics 
might be good candidates for identifying meaningful patterns of coherence between 
DOI: 10.4324/97810 03153924 -12
Neurophenomenology: Mapping Structures of the Mind 115
subjectivity, brain activity, and behavior. Within neurophenomenology, processes 
that appear consistently both within and between participants are known as phe-
nomenal invariants, a concept borrowed from both Western and Asian phenomeno-
logical traditions centered on “mapping” structures of the mind through disciplined 
introspection (Roy, Petitot, Pachoud, & Varela, 1999; Wallace, 1999). This process 
of classifying experiential phenomena in a manner complementary with the natural 
sciences is referred to as naturalization.
Ostensibly, phenomenal invariants greatly color how we experience the world, 
making them relevant to our study of minds. Furthermore, philosophers from the 
enactivist tradition suggest that invariants appear to us forms shaped by complex 
interactions between our brains, bodies, and environment (Varela, Thompson, & 
Rosch, 2017). This means that there is no “world out there” that can be appre-
hended independently from these limitations on our experience. In traditions such as 
phenomenology, psychotherapy, and mindfulness meditation, phenomenal invari-
ants can be identified through disciplined introspection. Generally, this process may 
occur through the suspension of habitual thoughts, freeing the mind to redirect 
attention and become receptive to the emergence of novel features of experience 
(Lutz & Thompson, 2003).
Several studies suggest that phenomenal invariants can indeed be identified, and 
that these structures relate to third-person observations of brain activity and behav-
ior (Diaz, Silveira, & Strand, 2020; Lutz & Thompson, 2003). For instance, in a 
seminal study on visual processing, a pair of researchers trained participants to 
notice their thoughts and feelings before, during, and after engaging in an exper-
imental task that involved pressing a button upon detecting a three-dimensional  
object (Lutz & Thompson, 2003). Through examining participants’ verbal responses, 
the researchers noticed that participants tended to feel either well-prepared for  
(steady readiness), moderately prepared (fragmented readiness), or somewhat sur-
prised (unreadiness) upon detection of the object. These phenomenal invariants 
later proved to be associated with distinct patterns of neural activity during visual 
detection.
In the vision study, the processes of suspension and redirection were enacted by 
informing participants that they were to focus not only on the appearance of the 
object (suspension), but also on the feelings and thoughts arising before and upon 
its detection (redirection). Through this enhanced awareness, participants were 
able to identify distinct patterns of experience associated with detecting the visual 
object (receptivity). These patterns were then used to group participants based on 
the phenomenological clusters of steady, fragmented, and unreadiness, in order 
to better understand variations in the neural patterns. In contrast, a purely third- 
person account of this phenomenon might have possibly omitted these group-based 
differences or created groupings tied to previous research or existing theoretical 
framework.
Creating groupings drawn from theory is not problematic in and of itself; how-
ever, one of the aims of neurophenomenology is to identify invariant groupings that 
emerge from lived experience. This is because according to the enactivist view of 
mind, experience is where we are likely to identify the influences of embodiment, cul-
ture, and environment that mediate cognition (Varela, Thompson, & Rosch, 2017). 
For instance, in cognitive neuroscience, physiological and behavioral phenomena are 
often examined with little to no accounting for the potential impact of participants’ 
mental or emotional state, their habits of mind, or the settings in which experiments 
occur. Moreover, even in studies that account for some of these variables, theoretical 
116 Frank M. Diaz
framings might unwittingly omit a meaningful explanatory variable, such as culture, 
or assume that results from an experiment might be generalizable to participants and 
environments vastly different from the ones investigated.
Mindfulness Meditation as Disciplined Introspection
Training participants to refine their introspection is one way to engage in neurophe-
nomenology, but in some cases, participants may already be engaging in these types of 
practices on their own. For instance, an increasing number of people, including many 
musicians, have reported that they meditate (Diaz, 2018). In addition, for those who 
engage in practices such as mindfulness meditation, disciplined introspection occurs 
in a manner similar to the three-part cycle proposed by Lutz and Thompson (2003). 
For example, many mindfulness practices instruct participants to “let go” of intrusive 
or judgmental thoughts while focusing on a selected object (suspension), redirect and 
stabilize attention to the present moment or other features of experience (redirection), 
and allow for novel features of experience to emerge during this act of stabilization 
(receptivity).
In a study by Berkovich-Ohana et al. (2020), the researchers used experienced 
meditators as participants in a neurophenomenological study of self-boundaries, 
arguing that meditators bring enhanced sensitivity to subtle aspects of lived experi-
ence. In a related study, Diaz, Silveira, and Strand (2020) examined how mindful-
ness training might enhance sensitivity to specific dimensions of experience among 
musician meditators. For music scholars, recruiting trained musician-meditators or 
using pre-recorded guided mindfulness tasks might assist in neurophenomenologi-
cal study.
Philosophical Roots of Neurophenomenology
The importance of first-person perspectives in neurophenomenology is rooted in the 
enactivist view of mind, which proposes that cognition is a groundless process that 
emerges through an organism’s dynamic coupling with its environment ( Va rel a , 
Thompson, & Rosch, 2017). When organisms act upon and make sense of their 
world, they do so in a manner influenced by the characteristics of their brains and 
bodies. A bee’s shape and sensory system afford it the capacity to notice flowers 
in a manner different from humans, and its brain allows it to process information 
relevant to pollination. Likewise, human beings act upon a world shaped not only 
by the limitations of their embodiment but by their cultural perspectives, habits of 
mind, and sense of self as well. While we will likely never know what it is like to be 
a bee, through disciplined examination of the dynamics of lived experience, we can 
learn a lot about what it is like to be a human. Therefore, to reduce or ground cog-
nition to any specific dimension, whether neural, physiological, or psychological, is 
to ignore the various dynamic, complex, and situated processes that likely influence 
its emergence.
Some enactivists cite the influence of Buddhist philosophical traditions, such as 
Madhyamaka (the middle way), for their conceptions of groundlessness. For instance, 
in Varela, Thompson, and Rosch’s seminal book, The Embodied Mind, the authors 
describe how Madhyamaka posits that nothing in the world has an independent 
nature. Rather, everything arises through dependent origination. There are numer-
ous examples of what might constitute dependent origination, but one way to bring 
Neurophenomenology: Mapping Structures of the Mind 117
reflect upon this concept is to consider your existence at this moment. You did not 
“spring” to life from nowhere. You had parents who came together somehow, and 
whose conditions for existence depended on their parents, and so forth. Therefore, 
there is no essential you, psychologically, physically, or otherwise, that is not in some 
way dependent on the existence of the things that caused it. Within Madhyamaka, 
dependent origination extends to anything that can be apprehended, including feel-
ings, perceptions, concepts, and the notion of a fixed or essential “self.” Because 
things do not have essential or independent natures, all phenomena are said to be 
“empty” (sunyata) of intrinsic existence.
In order to make sense of how this dynamic, complex, and distributed view of 
mind appears to us experientially, Varela, Thompson, and Rosch propose the need 
for disciplined introspection. Situated within the framework of neurophenomenology, 
disciplined introspection is how we arrive at phenomenal invariants, and these invari-
ants are the bridge we use to understand relationships between first- and third-person 
observations of cognition. Within Western philosophy, the phenomenological tradi-
tions put forth by Edmund Husserl and Maurice Merleau-Ponty qualify as forms 
of disciplined introspection. However, in the first edition of The Embodied Mind, 
the authors propose introspective approaches based on the Buddhist philosophies of 
Abhidharma and Madhyamaka, which they considered less abstract and more sit-
uated within the pragmatics of everyday life, and thus better suited for this kind of 
task.1
Second-Person Methods
The process of instigating, recalling, and making sense of first-person observations 
can be greatly enhanced by second-person methods (Berkovich-Ohana et al., 2020). 
Broadly, these approaches include strategies that assist participants in becoming 
sensitized to features of experience that might serve as “bridges” between first- and 
third-person observations. Second-person methods usually employ an experienced 
mediator, ensuring that the person helping to guide these introspective processes is 
familiar with the context under investigation. For neurophenomenological investiga-
tion, various kinds of second-person methods may be useful. These include guided 
introspection, such as the kind employed in the study on vision by Lutz and Thompson 
(2003), interview techniques, as well as adaptations of methods commonly employed 
in qualitative research. In the section that follows, I describe four potential avenues for 
facilitating introspection, including descriptive experience sampling (DES) (Hurlburt 
& Akhter, 2006), elicitation interviews (Vermersch, 2009), qualitative interviews, 
and surveys and questionnaires.
Descriptive Experience Sampling
DES is a method aimed at training participants to observe and describe inner expe-
riences that occur randomly throughout daily activities (Hurlburt & Akhter, 2006). 
Random solicitation here is designed to reduce biases that may be introduced through 
participants’ intentional selection of specific moments. During training, participants 
receive an electronic device such as a pager that randomly alerts them that it is time to 
observe and write about their present-moment experience. Participants usually receive 
six alerts during a 24-hour period and then meet with an interviewer the subsequent 
day to discuss their observations. Through an iterative process, the interviewer helps 
118 Frank M. Diaz
participants become increasingly aware of the kinds of thoughts, feelings, and images 
present in specific instances of awareness. This helps reduce the influence of expla-
nations of present-moment experience in which preconceptions about what may be 
happening distort what is truly occurring in present-moment consciousness.
Elicitation Interview
In elicitation interviews (ECs), researchers use a prescribed sequence of questioning 
techniques to determine common structures of experience associated with specific 
tasks (Vermersch, 2009). As in DES, the goal is to diminish the role of theorizing 
about experiences and instead sensitize participants to processes that underlie how 
experiences emerge and are structured in consciousness. The process outlined in ES is 
as follows: (a) select an experience (b) evoke the experience, (c) sensitize participants 
to how the experience unfolds in time, known as the diachronic dimension, (d) sen-
sitize participants to the experiential aspects of experience at each moment, known 
as the synchronic dimension. After data is collected, researchers analyze responses to 
determine commonalities between and within participants relating to the diachronic 
and synchronous dimensions of their experiences.
Qualitative Research Approaches2
In-depth and semi-structured interview techniques as employed in qualitative 
research may serve as models for developing second-person approaches in neu-
rophenomenology. Specifically, processes such as specifying a specific context or 
phenomena for participants to reflect on, allowing for a continuum of structure in 
the interview process (open-ended to structured questions), iterative processes for 
refining data (member checking and saturation), and structured and open-ended 
coding may meet some of the aims of the neurophenomenological approach.1 There 
is also an emphasis on triangulation and positionality in qualitative research that 
may help uncover bias in what interviewers ask participants and on how they inter-
pret data that emerges from these interviews. It should be stated here that qualita-
tive interview approaches do not necessarily aim at uncovering structural invariants 
for the kinds of purposes defined in the neurophenomenological approach. There 
are also key differences in the kinds of contexts and experiences examined between 
neurophenomenological and qualitative approaches, making any strict transfer 
between these domains problematic. However, with respect to protocols and pro-
cesses, much can be gained from exploring adaptations of these techniques within 
the neurophenomenological paradigm.
Surveys and Questionnaires
Within both psychology and sociology, there is a tradition of examining mental pro-
cesses, feelings, and behaviors through the use of questionnaires. These questionnaires 
are often designed to evaluate theories about latent phenomena such as cognitive pro-
cesses or personality traits that are not directly observable. Within neurophenomenol-
ogy, these kinds of more structured and theoretically derived approaches are referred 
to as thin phenomenology (Berkovich-Ohana et al., 2020). These methods may be 
useful for examining the reliability and validity of structural invariants that emerge 
from various forms of introspection but have not been widely applied within this 
framework.
